Thank you, friends. Thank you. Let's take a moment to do the most important part of the
whole time we share here. That's to reactivate our genuine bodhichitta, our feeling of closeness
and connection to all beings, and that wish and aspiration that what we're doing right
now becomes the direct cause of all beings' happiness and their enlightenment. We'll just
take a moment to do that. Thank you. I don't think it's a secret that I could say that
I love the Vajrayana. I love it. We all love it. And part of that love is recognizing that
Vajrayana is not a permanent honeymoon. When we initially get into Vajrayana or meet a
realized Dharma teacher or come in contact with the Buddha's teachings, sometimes its
experience is such a deep relief. Finally, there's a connection there. Regardless of
where the teachings are that we connect with, the four noble truths, seeing suffering, the
cause of suffering, there's a possible way out of suffering forever, and there's an actual
path to achieve that, to be in the presence of a noble being and to just genuinely receive
their acceptance and their love and their pervasive compassion and care and kindness.
Oftentimes that's a very pivotal moment because it's so rare in this world to receive that
level of acceptance and to be really seen, just genuinely to be in the presence, that
someone's with you and they're just fully with you. And we get this burst of enthusiasm
and we start practicing, we get interested, just like Lama Lai went over, this faith starts
arising, an interest in Dharma, a longing to learn more, even greater longing to try to
apply it and practice it and actually begin the process of changing our habits. That really
starts to open up or wake up or freshen on. And the difficulty is, is that just like everything
in life, that there always is a honeymoon phase when something's new, when we travel
somewhere new, when we meet someone new, we go to a new place, new house, new car, new
website, we refresh the newsfeed, it's a new day, there's that hit, new. And so we don't
really have to do any work to get the fresh feeling because it's just new. And so I think
that's to be cherished, those connections with these beings, these noble beings, with
the path, with the teachings, with all these techniques, is to be deeply cherished and nourished.
And that becomes the question of walking the path. Because even the teachings say, and
Venerable Kenshin, Paul Denscher Brimichet and Venerable Kenpo Saewandiny Brimichet have
said multiple times that oftentimes in a practice, when we first start practicing the Dharma,
a little bit of practice will release some really big, obvious, destructive habits. And
all of a sudden we'll set down big time burdens, just things that have really stuck with us
for so long. And a little bit of purification practice will release these big ice shelves
of negative habits. And then they go on to say that to really release the subtler habits
takes a lot of sustained practice. And that's the path. And so I think oftentimes I feel
like I'm kind of personally interested in opening up kind of cans of worms. Because
now the Dharma has been in the United States since some people say the late 1800s, at least
for a solid few generations, people of great masters have been coming here. So many teachings
have come here. So many have been translated into English and other languages. So many
centers have arisen. And in general, I think that this time now, and this is my opinion,
but this time now is not the time to do the ostrich move and stick our heads in the sand
and just want a really Dharma light, super simplified, make everything feel okay version
of Dharma. Like now there's enough of the Buddha Dharma around the world. And also the
intelligence of audience of people of us, like we're kind of a lot of people are really
speaking for deep meaning, for nourishment, for nutrition, to not be puritanically told
what to do. And also to not like in the vacuum of a lot of people are not very big fans of
organized religions for a lot of good reasons. History is a long history of some pretty difficult
horrible things with a lot of organized institutionalized religion. And as a result of that,
science
and scientific methodologies and looking closely has really gotten sharper attention, which
is so incredibly wonderful, which the Buddha taught verify things for ourselves, look thoroughly,
do due diligence. And the problem with that approach is science doesn't answer the question
of what is meaningful. It's not what science is designed to do, whether it's chemistry
or biology or anthropology or sociology. It's that question of what is meaningful, there
is this whole that a lot of people are aching to fill with something and we're projecting
meaning because we're meaning making monkeys, right? We always tell stories. We always have
narratives. And so there's this gap to fill of deep meaning.
And part of Vajrayana, which I'm so impressed and amazed is the more I look at it, the more
rich it becomes, the more amazing its response to all these challenging questions are. How
long for centuries and thousands of years the Buddha has answered these questions and given
us the techniques to ask for ourselves, who am I? What is going on? What are different
ways of knowing? What are different ontological landscapes? What is real? Different world
views, different views, different tawas that make sense of these really fundamental perennial
questions that don't go away. It's like baked into our brains and our minds to ask these
questions of deep meaning. And like so many people are hungry for that and we don't want
the easy answers like Einstein said, make it as simple as possible, but no simpler.
And Vajrayana steps up to that challenge and all the Buddha's teachings step up to that
challenge. And so opening some cans of worms and like looking at difficult topics that
are there to be looked at like devotion is a very controversial topic in a lot of places.
The function of secrecy, nested hierarchies, subtle energy and invisible beings, vast spectrums
of causality, karma, past lives, future lives, these are all like bread and butter Dharma
topics for centuries. But in a current window now, these have become really landmine areas.
And I think it's worth, I mean, it's just like different teachers have said, as we begin
the path and as we're continuing the path, like it only serves us to look closely at
the Buddha Dharma. We don't have to look at all the challenges at once. We don't have
to investigate every question at the same time, just like we don't have to practice
every practice at the same time. Like we don't have to do.
Part of the function of an inquiry is we have to stick with a specific inquiry for enough
time to let the revelation or the insight or the revealing or the unmasking or the releasing
or the relaxing to let it naturally happen. We have to stay with the inquiry and support
it enough that we transform and there's some degree of a resolution or a increased clarity
of seeing. And so my general approach is, and just like these teachings, this Dhujum
Teresar Nundro, to live webcast these teachings when all weird looking at a camera, we don't
know who's showing up. The container now is so big. Like anything I say now, anything
we do, basically we can assume it's being recorded in infinite history. As long as human
beings exist, the internet will be here. And these kind of become these statements that
carry a weight because the recordings are being archived somewhere. And that's a big
responsibility for all of us. And Vajrayana steps up to that challenge, because every
moment matters. Every moment and movement of mind, of openness of heart, has a significant
karmic impact, whether we believe it or not. And so the specific thing I wanted to kind
of feel into or open up a little today is that as we continue on the path, the beauty
of the path is as we keep on the path, it opens up. But it only opens up if we open
up. And that process of opening up of literally, in pretty literal ways, of breaking our habitual
common sense normalized boxes, the world views, the deep habits we have of making sense of
things, we have to like actually open them. I just heard Zok-Sarkhan Sirimache, he defined
renunciation as thinking outside of the box. So I thought of that. That's such an interesting
definition of renunciation mind. What box, and I assume that I'm kind of contemplating
this, what box, definitely the worldly box. Like when Manjushri talked to Sachin Kunga
Ningpo, he taught the parting from the eight, parting from the four attachments. Parting
from the first attachment is parting to our attachment to worldly life. And we've heard
this so many times, the eight worldly concerns. And we can all say it, a lot of us can, that
means getting over hope and fear. The only way to get beyond hope and fear is to keep
opening our own box. And looking what's outside of our box, what's outside of our frame, what's
a different way of seeing, a different way of knowing, a different way of tasting, a
different way of experiencing and engaging life. Basically the Vajrayana Path is asking
us to be as open to however much feedback from life we can handle. And that completely
is determined by our own willingness to be upended, to be put in a state of uncertainty,
to step outside of our normal frames of reference, to keep opening, to keep softening, to keep
relaxing, to keep inquiring, to actually let our minds be in a state of wonder or awe,
or just to be with a question without demanding an easy resolution. Simple, but not too simple.
To be in a state of actual contemplation where it's like the mind where it's clear and looking
closely, but it keeps not finding a definitive fixed answer. And that process of opening,
of like opening our own box, of like asking someone, developing a trusting relationship
with a great noble being or a Vajrayana Master or Guru, and having them help point out where
we're getting stuck, where we're holding unrealistic expectations, where our views aren't matching
up with reality and so we keep bumping into things and that's called samsara. We have
that trust with that relationship. We trust the path, refuge. We go for refuge in the Buddha
Dharma Sangha. We trust it enough to let it, to let it open us up, to let it help us look
closer and feel more fully, and be kind more fully, like to do things more fully, to enhance
how we're functioning in life. And that process really feels like getting cooked. It feels
you, there are a lot of metaphors for it, but in my little experience with applying
the teachings, that can really feel like being, like, you know, the brain is ripping, it's
like learning the process, the neural pathways are re-pathwaying. And there's a lot of science
being focused on this, like what actually puts us in a state of learning, of dealing
with uncertainty in a way where we don't shut down, but we actually get more inquisitive
and more curious. And that's so wonderful that we're actually taking that seriously
now. It's not just a, this is the only answer kind of model, or the only answer is what's
tangible right in front of me. But these are questions about what's meaningful in life.
What's meaningful to me? What's my purpose? What are my essential values? How do I know
that something's true? Because someone else knows something's true, and it's a different
truth, and it can be contradictory. So like, how do I know how to assess knowing? Buddha
has like such an extensive teaching on epistemology and logic, all this ontology, and then also
these performance methodologies to actually enhance our ways of understanding, of knowing,
of making sense, of having fun, like revealing habits that we don't know we have, that we
never saw because we just couldn't see it in our box. Like the boxes we have, the frames
we have, the views we hold, they're invisible. The funny thing is they're oftentimes not
invisible to other people. So I have like a mini confession. So the other night, sitting
with my wife, it's late, put in a movie. Night at the Museum, part two. Okay. Quality. Ben
Stiller, Amy Adams, Owen Wilson, the trials, the tribulations, the triumphs, basically
the museum, Smithsonian Museum, After Dark, all the mannequins and little figurines come
alive. And it's kind of funny because it's culturally relevant. Like when the cave people
fight the patriotic soldiers, fight the T-Rex, fight the, all the different aspects of historical
big names or get into a war with each other and somehow try to make friends. And I was
laughing. There was a scene in the movie and it's this scene where this monkey and another
monkey start slapping Ben Stiller in the face and they're slapping each other and they're
slapping and I'm just laughing, watching these little monkeys slap each other and I'm laughing.
And my wife turns to me and she says, you always laugh at monkeys. And I was like, what? Yeah,
whenever monkeys do funny things, you laugh. And later I was like, that is a habit I definitely
did not know I had. Funny monkeys. But for her it was like so obvious. It was just like
point blank. Like you always laugh at monkeys. This is such a trivial habit. It's so easy
because we're so habituated to look outside and always assess because it's not threatening
to me, to my frames. I don't have to change anything if I just stand on the sidelines
and judge and say this is this opinion and that should be this way and change this policy
and allocate this here and that shouldn't be red, it should be white. It's so easy.
We're tuned to look out through all this hardware and try to say that my way is the right way
and it should be this way. It's really hard to see those frames in ourselves. And when
we put ourselves in a system like Vajrayana or like Buddhism, the system is designed to
help us see what we're doing. This cognitive behavioral scientist defined wisdom which
was so interesting in the Western canon like Sophia. Wisdom is the metacognitive capacity
to see self-deception. I can see when I'm fooling myself, to see a limit I have and
then to witness it from outside and not fall for it again. Wisdom. And Buddhism can be
defined really as an unmasking or as a seeing clearly of removing the obscurations and having
our true nature shine brightly as it is without being obstructed by self-deception. And so
this process of looking at me, at me, what am I doing, how am I reacting both alone and
with other people, what am I saying, what am I not saying, showing up kindly, harmoniously,
with good timing, how much am I doing that with people, with myself, how timely is my
internal critique of myself, when do I see something that's helpful to see and so I can
do something about it or just another way of pushing myself down. The Buddha taught
all this Sheela, this methods of ethics and these techniques of samadhi in this wisdom.
And in Vajrayana it's really like to some degree when we say Vajrayana it's like there's
the promise that in a single lifetime we can be free of suffering. We can fully achieve
a transcendental wisdom rainbow body. We can fully be natural, just be who we are, see
what we didn't see before because we couldn't see in that way. Our scene wasn't lined up
with all the full spectrum of what was there to be seen. Or you could see it as co-creating
reality the way we saw squeezed everything and we saw the squeezed version of everything
through our box, through our vision, through our funnel. And Vajrayana's saying full spectrum
receive feedback of the entire span and spectrum of experience in life. And what we pray, it's
a common Vajrayana pray, it's a common Mahayana, like tantra, or sorry Sutra Mahayana prayer,
may all the negative karma of all beings ripen on me now. And when we pray that, what do
we think is going to happen? If we really take this seriously, that is going to be a really
big headache. That is going to be, that wish coming true is going to really rock our boat.
All the karma of all beings ripen on me now. So they can be freed. It's such a kind compassionate
prayer. It's just the, Bodhicitta is the bedrock lowest common denominator of all tantra practice
in Buddhism. Bodhicitta, the lowest common denominator, what always has to be there every
single time is Bodhicitta. Any question we have, the answer is Bodhicitta. Any problem
we get into, the answer is Bodhicitta. Then the question is unpacking Bodhicitta in a
way that's appropriate to our experience now that can really support us to look further,
to live more fully, to feel more fully, to release more fully, to relax more fully. And
I can't do that. I'm just totally a little person on the path or like many people. And
it feels like I'm just putting a name to the experience. I think it really serves a purpose
to not pretend like Vajrayana is a honeymoon and that's all it is. Because if you stay
on the path for a not very long period of time and we get triggered, intentionally triggered,
we get upended. We get uncertain. The technique itself pushes us to grow. It pushes us to
open and like laugh, laugh at ourselves, to lighten up. When that happens and it happens
again and it happens again and these subtle habits that are really difficult to release,
when the actual meat of the path happens, we'll have been given a heads up. This is
it working. This is the path working. And then it becomes really critically important
to distinguish what does me actually going on the path and like opening up and freeing
up and getting clear and soft and bodhicitta full and what is me just like getting hurt
by samsara. This again and again because we're good at that. So how can we distinguish when
it's actually we're going on the path and we're actually it's opening or we're just
stuck in a rut and we're spinning our wheels and it feels like friction but it's not really
going anywhere on the path. It's just spinning wheels because they both feel bad. No, it's
not all not all bad. There's like such amazing insights because what the release of seeing
bigger of loving more fully. It's so wonderful to have a session that's really soaked in
bodhicitta to have a minute of it. It's like so nourishing. Remember she says that's the
supreme medicine to have a moment of bodhicitta. It fixes all ills. So then that question that's
like a question I leave with how do we know when we're just spinning our wheels and it's
just the tension of like just like my way of basically of not getting my way. I'm a
Buddhist. I'm going on the path and all this and it's just I'm not getting my way and so
I'm like shaking versus I'm a Buddhist. I'm on the path. I'm really trying to apply the
instructions and like this it feels it's it's hard. It like feels sticky. These habits to
release. It's like difficult work. Anyone who's gone on retreat is difficult to stay
with it. It's difficult to put our mind somewhere and like let its energy come out naturally
and see how it is so energetic and to stay with the technique long enough for it to actually
transform us is difficult. But one thing Vajrayana and all this Buddhism should do is increase
our agency. Increase my sense of responsibility and like I can do this and I deserve this.
I'm worth it. In this situation there are ways that this is workable and so I'm going
to keep I'm going to sit down again on this cushion or I'm going to say this mantra or
I'm going to like actually listen to someone instead of just kind of like bouncing against
them like all these things are Dharma practices like Dharma should definitely increase our
own internal resilience and our internal confidence in their little windows where that kind of
dark night of the soul feeling of like really being broken open to like actually grow new
bones and like actually grow like it can all these kind of questions can come up to questions
of devotion and questions of connection and all that and it's only student Rinpoche and
mountain retreat instructions really clearly says these are signs that we should stick
to our practice. Guru Rinpoche said our sadhana practice we should never give up until we
attain enlightenment. We can't throw out the relative supports. We'll keep doing nundra
until we get enlightened because we can never give up the lowest common denominator of bodhicitta.
Then at that point it'll just be unfabricated natural bodhicitta. We won't have to work
at it. It'll just come through us because that's all this is and we just won't get in
the way. My way will be all beings way and we'll just naturally reflect for others benefit.
It should definitely lighten up the path like in a longer view not just a hard day of practice
but in a longer view we should get more like light more seeing from different perspectives
not just my version but really all these different versions their story her story his story its
story all these versions we should start to get more flexible with seeing this and how
we see ourselves not just one same old repeated story of ourself. It should start to get more
dynamic more vibrant a little more playful. That's definitely an indication that the tension
is actually healthy dynamic tension. It's not stuck. It's not kind of banging against anything
or rigidly kind of unwilling to change. Those are a few thoughts. I think really doing the
whole cooking in the Vajrayana soup really being under the guidance of a realized master
in an authentic lineage. It's the really one thing that Vajrayana and I'm so thankful in
the 21st century. There's so much on the table now to look at these perspectives how to create
communities that are like scalable enough. It's the right. It's the right amount of support.
It's not too much coddling. It's like these inquiries that aren't just heady propositional
ways of knowing but they're performative enacted extended embodied communicative grounded practices
like Vajrayana has all this. Vajrayana was Buddha taught this a long time ago all these
ways of knowing perspectival knowing performative knowing participatory knowing putting ourself
in a state of uncertainty and staying there seeing things clearly like propositional ways
of knowing studying the scriptures applying the teachings in practice that's a beauty
of the Buddha Dharma especially the Vajrayana teachings is that we can take all these new
insights that are coming from all these wonderful myriad perspectives of people really deep
research and really curious new ways of looking at things emergent voices that haven't been
allowed to be shared that we can take these bits of insight and look at Vajrayana with
them and Vajrayana has nothing to fear it will only enhance our appreciation of the
profound techniques and realization that the Buddha shared with us with these Vajrayana
methodologies I have I definitely have no doubt about that the more I look in the very
little time I've looked it only keeps opening and then the question is how much am I willing
to open and we don't have to just rip ourselves open because that's not a path that is emergency
room time we need to gradually let it happen organically and it means putting the time
in and keeping doing it and being kind enough that we that we hold ourselves accountable
to the lineage we keep going soft but firm we ask for help when we need it we check in
with our teachers when when we need it we check in with Sangha sisters and brothers
when we need it we check our own minds when we need it and then little by little the path
will open and deepen because we'll open and deepen and it'll only be so much gratitude
and appreciation for this and it's not the end the final answer I know it's going long
here but the final answer isn't Buddhism for everyone or Vajrayana for everyone that's
not at all what I'm saying I'm just saying how fortunate we are we're in a system we're
in this amazing system of teachings that have been tried and tested by all these beings
and they're like shining exemplars of achieving the pinnacle of human potential full actualization
of enlightenment and they keep coming back to help and all their life stories are just
these beautiful examples of like how do I engage when obstacles come up when challenges
come up because all their life stories are just filled with being of with overcoming
and in dealing with obstacles and pick a life story of one of these great masters they really
had the courage and the stamina and the commitment and the flexibility the kindness to themselves
and others to keep with it for all beings because we're trying to serve all beings and
we can only serve all beings when we connect to all beings the way they are not the way
I want them to be or my the Buddhist version of them but actually on the ground how is
someone feeling how are they suffering how are they beautiful how are they offering this
shining creative insight we connect with that not with some you know fantasize pretend version
of how Buddhism needs to be everywhere and that's answered everything or something silly
like that because minds are so different our habits are so different the each of our paths
is so different but we're so fortunate to be in this set of practices like this nundra
practice with these living teachers and this lineage of teachers and we have this connection
and like it's so valuable to keep fostering the connection to keep fostering it and when
it dims and when it gets a little weak or we get a little hazy or we get confused or
overwhelmed or too stressed or just the daily grind thing that we really keep in mind like
how precious this this is this opportunity this system our connection we really keep
that as a central kind of core thing in our lives that this whole these techniques are
available for us and we can keep applying them and it's only going to enhance our life
and we just have to be patient enough to go like technique by technique recipe by recipe
and check in am I doing it according to the lineage instructions not because it's a set
in stone set of instructions is eighty four thousand teachings it's three million four
hundred thousand tantras so chin tantras is a lot of different recipes and it all came
to the Buddha but right now for me what's appropriate what rings true how can I soften
how can I open up how can I use this challenge this tension of like just not wanting to grow
more you know of being comfortable enough you know so near a bitch a he said there's
a big difference in the amount of effort to use Dharma to just have a pretty good worldly
life compared to how much effort it takes to get on the first booming path of seeing
that if we get on the first boomy then we can really serve beings will never make the
mistake of demanding my way again we'll just love beings though as they are and we'll do
everything we can to help them to really serve them I'm so excited that that these teachings
are available they still exist these teachers still exist all this stuff we're right in
the middle of this amazing opportunity really genuinely have so much thanks for each of
you for all these sangha sisters and brothers for these great lineage masters and then when
I forget that and I get all shut down and I just need to watch some crappy Ben Stiller
movie to just chill and laugh to remember you know Dharma Buddha Dharma you know the
Sangha Dharma Buddha Buddha nature kindness lose reflexible fun nature these key things
these fundamentals may I please never forget them ever because this is it will only yeah
because I want to be happy and get enlightened so thank you thank you